Pierre Morf: Welcome
to the session on how to tune
CPU job scheduling
for Apple silicon games.
I'm Pierre Morf, working
in the Metal Ecosystem team.
I've been helping several
third-party developers
to optimize their GPU and CPU
workloads on Apple platforms.
With the help
of the CoreOS team,
I gathered here information
and guidelines
to achieve better
CPU performance
and efficiency in games.
We are focusing on games,
because they are usually
highly demanding
in terms of
hardware resources.
Also, their typical workload
requires hundreds,
if not thousands,
of CPU jobs to be processed
every frame.
To get those done
in 16 milliseconds or less,
jobs must be tailored
for maximum CPU throughput,
and their submission overhead
must be minimized.
First, I'll go through
an overview
of the Apple silicon CPU
and its unique architecture.
Then, I'll provide you
with fundamental guidance
on how to organize your work
to maximize the CPU efficiency.
Finally, we'll discuss
useful APIs to leverage,
once those guidelines
are implemented.
Let's get started with
the Apple CPU architecture.
Apple has been
designing its own chips
for more than a decade.
They are at the core
of Apple devices.
Apple silicon offers
high performance
and unmatched efficiency.
Last year,
Apple introduced the M1 chip.
That was the first
Apple silicon chip
to be made available
to Mac computers.
And this year...
...we introduced M1 Pro,
and M1 Max.
Their new design is a huge
leap for Apple silicon
and makes them able
to efficiently tackle
very demanding workloads.
The M1 chip gathers in a single
package many components.
It contains a CPU, a GPU,
Neural Engine, and many more.
It also has a high-bandwidth,
low-latency unified memory;
it is accessible to all
the chip's components
through Apple Fabric.
That means the CPU and GPU
may work on the same data
without copying it.
Let's zoom into the CPU.
On M1, the CPU contains cores
of two different types:
the performance cores
and the efficiency cores.
Those are physically different,
the E cores being smaller.
The efficiency cores
are meant to process work
with a very low
energy consumption.
There is a very important
takeaway point:
the P and E cores use
a similar microarchitecture,
which is really
their inner working.
They've been designed so that
developers don't need to care
whether a thread runs
on a P or E core.
If a program is optimized to
perform well on a type of core,
it is expected to perform
well on the other.
Those cores are physically
grouped together into clusters,
at least according
to their type.
On M1, each cluster has
a last level cache -- a L2 --
shared by all of its cores.
Cross-cluster communication
goes through Apple Fabric.
The CPU topology shown here
is specific to the M1 chip.
Other devices may have
a different CPU layout.
For example, an iPhone XS
has one cluster of two P cores,
and one cluster
of four E cores.
This architecture allows
the system to optimize
for performance when needed
or to optimize for efficiency
instead,
improving the battery life,
when performance
is not a priority.
Each cluster may be
independently activated
or have its frequency adjusted
by the kernel's scheduler --
depending on
the current workload,
the current thermal pressure
for that cluster,
and other factors.
Finally, note the availability
of P cores is not guaranteed.
The system reserves the right
to make them unavailable
under critical
thermal scenarios.
Here is an overview
of the different API layers
interacting with the CPU.
First we have XNU --
the kernel running
macOS and iOS.
That is where
the scheduler lives,
deciding what runs
on the CPU and when.
On top of it,
we have two libraries:
POSIX with pthreads
and Mach objects.
They both provide
fundamental threading
and synchronization primitives
to the application.
On top of that we have
higher-level libraries.
Thread-related NSObjects
encapsulate POSIX handles.
In example,
an NSLock encapsulates
a pthread_mutex_lock,
a NSThread encapsulates
a pthread, among other things.
That is also where GCD sits.
GCD is an advanced
job manager.
We will cover it later.
In this session,
we will work our way up
starting from the low level,
finishing with API features.
Let's start by focusing on
what works best for the CPU,
and how to lighten the
workload put on the scheduler.
This will be our fundamental
efficiency guidelines.
They apply to any job
manager implementation,
are API-agnostic,
and apply to many platforms --
including both Apple silicon
and Intel-based Macs.
Let's imagine we are
in an ideal world
and we have this job.
If we spread it
over four cores,
it should be processed exactly
four times quicker, right?
Unfortunately, that's not as
straightforward in a real CPU.
There are many bookkeeping
operations going on,
each costing
some execution time.
There should be three costs
to keep in mind for efficiency.
Look at the cores
1, 2, and 3.
They were not doing anything
before processing our job.
Well, when a CPU core
has nothing to do
for quite some time,
it goes idle to save energy.
And reactivating an idle core
takes a little bit of time.
That is our first cost,
the core wake-up cost.
Here is another one.
CPU work is first initiated
by the OS scheduler.
It decides which process and
thread should be running next,
and on which core.
The CPU core then switches
to that execution context.
We'll call that
the scheduling cost.
Now, the third and last
type of cost.
Let's consider the thread
running on Core 0
signals the ones
on cores 1, 2, and 3.
For example, with a semaphore.
That signaling
is not instantaneous.
During this interval,
the kernel has to identify
which thread is waiting
on the primitive;
and in case the thread
was not active,
it needs to schedule it.
This delay is called
the synchronization latency.
Those costs appear,
in one form or another,
in most CPU architectures.
They are not an issue
by themselves,
as they are very, very short.
But they may become
a performance hit
if they accumulate,
appearing repeatedly
and frequently.
What do those costs
look like in real life?
This is an instruments trace
of a game running on M1.
That game exhibits
a problematic pattern,
repeated most of its frames.
It tries to parallelize jobs at
an extremely fine granularity.
We already zoomed
a lot into its timeline.
To give you an idea,
that section only takes
18 microseconds.
Let's focus on that CPU core,
and those two threads.
Those two threads could
have been running in parallel,
but they ended up running
serially on that same core.
Let's see why.
They synchronize
with each other very often.
The first one signals
the second one to start
and very quickly
waits for its peer to be done.
The second starts working,
quickly signals the first one,
and waits very shortly after.
This pattern repeats
over and over.
We can see two issues here:
first, synchronization
primitives are used
at an extremely
high frequency.
That interrupts work
and introduces overhead.
We can see that overhead
with the red sections.
Second, the active work --
the blue sections --
is extremely brief.
it only lasts between four
and 20 microseconds.
This duration is so small,
it is barely shorter
than the time it takes
to wake up a CPU core.
During those red sections,
the OS scheduler
was mostly waiting
for a CPU core to wake up.
But right before that happens,
a thread blocks
and frees up the core.
The second thread
then runs on that same core
instead of waiting
a little bit longer
for another one to wake up.
That's how those two threads
lost a tiny opportunity
to run in parallel.
Just from this observation,
we can already define
two guidelines.
First, choose
the right job granularity.
We can achieve it by merging
tiny jobs into larger ones.
Scheduling a thread
takes a little bit of time,
no matter what.
If a job becomes tiny,
the scheduling cost
will take a relatively larger
part of the thread's timeline.
The CPU will be underutilized.
On the contrary, larger jobs
amortize the scheduling cost
by running for longer.
We have seen
a professional application --
submitting lots of
30-microseconds work items --
drastically increasing
their performance
when they merged them.
Second, line up enough work
before leveraging threads.
This can be done every frame,
by getting most jobs
ready at once.
When you signal
and wait for threads,
that generally means
some will be scheduled
on the CPU core
and some will be blocked
and moved off core.
Doing that many times
is a performance pitfall.
Waking and pausing
threads repeatedly
adds more of the costs
we just talked about.
Conversely, making threads
process more jobs
without interruption
removes synchronization points.
As an example, when dealing
with nested for-loops,
it is a much better idea
to parallelize the outer for
at a coarser granularity.
That leaves the inner loops
uninterrupted.
That gives them
a better coherency,
a better cache utilization,
and overall,
fewer of those
synchronization points.
Before leveraging
more threads,
determine if it
is worth the cost.
Let's now have a look
at another game trace.
That one was running
on an iPhone XS.
We'll focus
on those helper threads.
We can see the
synchronization latency here.
This is the time
it took the kernel
to signal those
different helpers.
There are two issues here:
first, the actual work
is extremely small again --
roughly 11 microseconds --
especially in comparison
to the entire overhead.
Merging those jobs together
would have been
more energy efficient.
Second issue:
in that timespan,
80 different threads
were scheduled on three cores.
We can see
context switches here,
those tiny gaps
between active work.
In this example,
it isn't a problem yet --
but with more threads,
context switching time
may accumulate and hinder
the CPU performance.
How can we minimize all those
different kinds of overhead
when a typical game has at least
hundreds of jobs every frame?
The best way of doing so
is by using a job pool.
Worker threads consume them
through job stealing.
Scheduling a thread
is done by the kernel;
we saw it takes some time.
And the CPU
also has to do some work,
like context switching.
On the other hand, starting
a new job in user-space
is much cheaper.
Generally, a worker just has
to decrement an atomic counter,
and grab a pointer to a job.
Second point:
avoid interacting
with predetermined threads,
since using workers will reduce
the amount of context switches.
And as they grab more jobs,
you leverage
an already active thread
on an already active core.
Finally, use your pool wisely.
Wake up just enough workers
for the work being queued up.
And the previous rule
applies here too:
ensure enough work is lined up
to justify waking
a worker thread,
and keeping it busy.
We reduced our overhead;
now, we must make the most
out of our CPU cycles.
Here are some
patterns to avoid.
Avoid busy waits.
They potentially
lock a P core,
instead of doing something
useful with it.
They also prevents the scheduler
from promoting a thread
from and E to a P core.
You are also wasting energy
and producing unnecessary heat,
eating away
your thermal headroom.
Second, the definition
of the yield function is loose
across platforms
and even OSes.
On Apple platforms, it means,
"try to cede
the core I'm running on
to any other thread
on the system,
anything else,
whatever their priority is."
It effectively tanks the current
thread priority to zero.
A yield also has
a system-defined duration.
It may be very long --
up to 10 milliseconds.
Third, calls to sleep
are discouraged as well.
Waiting for a specific event
is much more efficient.
Also, note on Apple platforms,
sleep(0) has a no meaning
and that call is even discarded.
Those patterns
are generally a sign
a fundamental scheduling error
happened in the first place.
Instead,
wait on explicit signals
with a semaphore
or a conditional variable.
Final guideline:
scale the thread count
to match the CPU core count.
Avoid recreating new thread
pools in each framework
or middleware you are using.
Do not scale your thread count
based on your workload either.
If your workload
increases dramatically,
so will your thread count.
Instead, query CPU information
to size your thread pool
appropriately,
and maximize
parallelization opportunities
for the current system.
Let's see how to query
this information.
Starting with macOS Monterey
and iOS 15,
you can query advanced details
about the CPU layout
with the sysctl interface.
In addition to get an
overall count of all CPU cores,
you can now query how many
types of cores a machine has
with nperflevels.
On M1, we have two
types of cores: P and E.
Use this range to query
data per core type,
zero being the
most performant.
For example,
perflevel.logicalcpu
tells how many P cores
the current CPU has.
This is just an overview.
You can also query
many other details,
like how many cores
share the same L2.
For more details,
refer to the sysctl man page,
or the documentation webpage.
When profiling your CPU usage,
two instruments tracks
are very useful.
They are available in the
Game Performance template.
The first one, System Load,
gives the number of active
threads per CPU core.
The second one
is Thread State Trace.
By default, the detail pane
shows the amount
of thread state changes
and their duration per process.
It can be changed to
the Context Switches view.
This will give you a count
of context switches per process
in the selected time range.
Context switches count
is a useful metric to measure
an app's scheduling
efficiency.
Let's close on this section.
By following those guidelines,
you will make the most
out of the CPU
and streamline what
the scheduler has to do.
Compacting tiny, tiny jobs
into longer running ones
increases the benefits of
microarchitectural features,
like caches, prefetchers,
and predictors.
Processing more jobs at once
means less interrupt latency
and context switches.
An appropriately scaled
thread pool makes it easier
for the scheduler to rebalance
work between E and P cores.
A key take-away for efficiency
and performance
is to minimize the frequency
at which your workload
is going wide and narrow.
Let's now dive into which
API blocks you can leverage
while applying
those guidelines.
In this section,
we'll cover prioritization
and scheduling policies,
synchronization primitives,
and memory considerations
when multithreading.
But first, let's start by
having a sneak peek at GCD.
If you don't have
a job manager,
or if it doesn't reach the high
performance you are aiming for,
GCD is a fantastic choice.
It is a general-purpose
job manager using job stealing.
It is available on all
Apple platforms and Linux,
and it is open source.
This API is highly optimized.
First, it already follows
all the best practices for you.
Second, it is integrated
in the XNU kernel.
That means GCD may keep track
of internal details for you,
like the heat dissipation
capacity of the current machine,
its P/E core ratio,
the current thermal pressure
and so on.
Its interface relies on serial
and concurrent dispatch queues.
You can enqueue jobs in them
with varying priorities.
Internally, each dispatch queue
leverages a variable amount
of threads from
a private thread pool.
That number depends on the type
of queue and job properties.
This internal thread pool is
shared for the entire process.
That means in a given process,
multiple libraries may use GCD
without recreating a new pool.
GCD offers many features.
Here we'll quickly review
just two functions
from the concurrent
dispatch queues,
just to get a sense
of how it works.
The first one, dispatch_async,
allows you to enqueue a job
made of a function pointer
and a data pointer.
When starting a job,
the concurrent queue
may leverage an additional
thread if the next job in line
is also ready to be processed.
That is a great option
for typical asynchronous
independent jobs.
But not so much
for massively parallel problems.
In that case,
there is dispatch_apply.
That one will leverage many
threads right from the start,
without overloading
GCD's thread manager.
We have seen several pro apps
increasing their performance
by migrating a parallel for
to using dispatch_apply.
That was just
a quick overview of GCD.
To learn more about it
and which patterns to avoid,
refer to those
two WWDC sessions.
Let's now switch
to custom job managers.
We'll cover the most
important points
when manipulating
threads directly
and synchronizing them.
Let's begin
with prioritization.
In the previous section,
we reviewed how to increase
the CPU efficiency
when submitting jobs.
But so far, we had not mentioned
that all jobs are not equal.
Some are time-critical,
their result is needed
as soon as possible.
And some other
will only be required
in the next frame or two.
So it is necessary to convey
a sense of importance
when processing your jobs
to give more resources
to the more important ones.
That can be done
by prioritizing your threads.
Setting the right thread
priorities also informs
the system your game
is more important
than background activity.
This can be achieved
by setting a thread
with either a raw CPU
priority value or a QoS class.
Both concepts are related,
yet slightly different.
A raw CPU priority
is an integer value
telling how important
computational throughput is.
On Apple platforms,
contrary to Linux,
this is an ascending value --
the higher, the more important.
This CPU priority also hints --
among other factors --
at whether a thread should run
on a P or E core.
Now, this CPU priority
doesn't affect
the rest of system resources
since it doesn't give
any intention
about what the
thread is doing.
Threads can instead
be prioritized
with Quality of Service --
QoS for short.
QoS has been designed
to attach semantics to threads.
This intention greatly
helps the scheduler
to make intelligent decisions
about when to execute tasks,
and makes the OS
more responsive.
For example,
a lower importance task
may be slightly deferred in
time in order to save energy.
It also allows to prioritize
system resources access
like network, disk access.
It also provides thresholds
for timer coalescing --
an energy-saving feature.
QoS classes also include
a CPU priority.
There are five QoS classes,
going from
QOS_CLASS_BACKGROUND,
the least important one,
to QOS_CLASS_USER_INTERACTIVE,
the highest one.
Each includes
a default CPU priority.
Optionally, you may slightly
downgrade it
within a limited range.
This is useful if you want
to finely tweak the CPU priority
for several threads opting
into the same QoS class.
Note to be very careful
with the Background class --
threads using it may not
run at all for a very long time.
So overall, games use CPU
priorities ranging from 5 to 47.
Let's see how that's done
in practice.
First, you need to allocate
and initialize
the pthread attributes
with default values.
You then set
the required QoS class
and then pass those attributes
to the pthread_create function.
Finish by destroying
the attributes structure.
You can also set a QoS class
to an already existing thread.
As an example, that function
affects the calling thread.
Note here,
we used an offset of -5,
downgrading the class
CPU priority from 47 to 42.
Note you can see the np suffix
in the function names.
That stands for "nonportable";
it's a naming convention
used for functions
exclusive to Apple platforms.
Finally, beware that if instead
of using those functions,
you directly set a raw CPU
priority value,
you opt out of QoS
for that thread.
That is permanent,
and you cannot opt back in QoS
for that thread afterwards.
iOS and macOS deal
with many processes,
user-facing or running
in the background.
In some cases, the system
may become overloaded.
If that happens,
the kernel needs a way
to ensure all threads get
a chance to run at some point.
That is done
with priority decay.
In this special case,
the kernel slowly lowers
thread priorities over time;
all threads then have
a chance to run.
Priority decay
may be problematic
in very special cases.
Typically, games have a couple
of highly critical threads,
like the main thread
and the render thread.
If the render thread
gets preempted,
you may miss
a presentation window,
and the game will stutter.
In those cases, you can
opt out of priority decay
with scheduling policies.
By default,
threads a created with
the SCHED_OTHER policy.
This is a time-sharing policy.
Threads using it may be subject
to priority decay.
It is also compatible
with QoS classes
we presented before.
On the other hand, we have
the optional SCHED_RR policy.
RR stands for "round-robin".
Threads opting into it
have a fixed priority
unaffected by priority decay.
It offers a better consistency
in execution latency.
Note it is exclusively designed
for consistent, periodic,
and high-priority work,
for example,
a dedicated render thread
or per-frame worker threads.
Threads opting into it must work
on a very specific time window,
and not continuously busy
the CPU 100 percent of the time.
Using this policy may also
lead to starvation
in your other threads.
Finally, this policy is
incompatible with QoS classes --
threads will need to use
a raw CPU priority.
Here is a recommended
layout for game threads.
First, define within your game
what is high-, medium-
and low-priority
and what is critical
to the user experience.
Splitting work by priority
lets the system know
which parts of your application
are the most important.
Use instruments
to profile your game,
and only opt into SCHED_RR
for the threads
which actually need it.
Also, never use SCHED_RR
for a long duration work,
extending multiple frames.
Rely on QoS in those cases
to help the system
balance performance
with other processes.
Another reason to favor
opting into QoS
is when a thread interacts
with Apple frameworks like GCD
or NSOperationQueues.
Those frameworks try to
propagate the QoS class
from the job issuer
into the job itself.
That is obviously ignored
if the issuing thread
has abandoned QoS.
Let's cover one last point
related to priorities:
priority inversion.
Priority inversion happens when
a high-priority thread stalls,
being blocking by
a low-priority thread.
This typically happens
with mutual exclusions.
Two threads try to access
the same resource,
fighting to get the same lock.
In some cases, the system may be
able to resolve this inversion
by boosting
the low-priority thread.
Let's see how that works.
Let's consider two threads --
here are their
execution timeline.
In this example,
the blue thread is low priority,
the green one
is high priority.
In the middle,
we have the lock timeline,
showing which of the two
threads will own that lock.
The blue thread
starts executing,
and acquires the lock.
The green thread also starts.
At this point, the green thread
tries to acquire that lock,
currently owned
by the blue thread.
The green thread blocks
and waits for that lock
to be available again.
In this case,
the runtime can tell
which thread owns that lock.
Therefore, it can resolve
the priority inversion,
by boosting the blue thread's
low priority.
Which primitives have
the ability to resolve
priority inversion
and which ones don't?
Symmetric primitives with a
single known owner can do that,
like pthread_mutex_t or the most
efficient, os_unfair_lock.
Asymmetric primitives like
pthread conditional variables
or dispatch_semaphore
don't have this ability,
because the runtime doesn't know
which thread will signal it.
Keep this feature in mind
when choosing
a synchronization primitive,
and favor symmetric primitives
for mutually exclusive access.
To finish this section,
let's discuss a couple of
recommendations about memory.
When interacting with
Objective-C frameworks,
some objects are created
as autorelease.
That means they are added
to a list,
so that their deallocation
only happens at a later time.
Autorelease pool blocks
are scopes
limiting how long such objects
can be kept around.
They effectively help reducing
the peak memory footprint
of your app.
It is important to have
at least one autorelease pool,
in every thread entry point.
If any thread manipulates
autoreleased objects --
for example, through Metal --
without one,
that will lead
to memory leaks.
Autorelease pool blocks
can be nested,
to better control
when memory is recycled.
The render thread should
ideally create a second one
around the repeated frame
rendering routine.
Worker threads should
have a second one
starting on activation
and closed as the worker
gets parked,
waiting for more work.
Let's see an example.
This is a worker thread
entry point.
It starts right away with
an autorelease pool block.
It then waits for jobs
to be available.
When the worker
gets activated,
we add a new
autorelease pool block,
and keep it around
as we process jobs.
When the thread is about
to wait and be parked,
we exit the nested pool.
To conclude,
one quick tip about memory.
To improve performance,
avoid having multiple threads
simultaneously write data
located in the same cache line.
That is known
as "false sharing".
Multiple reads from the
same data structure is fine,
but such competing writes lead
to ping-ponging that cache line
between different
hardware caches.
On Apple silicon,
a cache line is 128 bytes long.
One solution to this
is inserting padding
within your data structure
to reduce memory conflicts.
We are done
with this last section.
Let's wrap up.
We first got an overview
of the Apple CPU architecture,
and how its
groundbreaking design
makes it much more efficient.
Then, we got into how to feed
the CPU efficiently
and make it run smoothly
while reducing the load
put on the OS scheduler.
We finally reviewed
important API concepts,
such as thread prioritization,
scheduling policies,
priority inversion,
finishing with tips
about memory.
Don't forget to regularly
profile your game
with instruments to keep
an eye on its workload,
so you can spot
performance issues early.
Thank you for your attention.